[Music]
the privatization of prisons and
detention centers has been a source of
debate for over three decades there has
to be some things in our society that we
agree are not a business opportunity
there's absolutely nothing wrong with
profiting off of anything the question
is are you providing a service with good
quality with humane conditions and so on
and moral imperative of government
should be to deliver the best outcomes
the u.s. privatized parts of its state
and federal Corrections and attention
facilities in the 1980s two companies in
particular core civic NGO group have
dominated the industry but the
uncertainty of a highly polarized
industry stems mainly from the political
climate at the end of President Obama's
second term then Deputy Attorney General
Sally Yates announced that the
administration would phase out private
prisons core civic and Geo stocks
plummeted two months later President
Trump was elected and the stocks soared
there has been political sensitivity in
our stock it's unfortunate but our focus
continues to be operations that's what
we can control we can't control the
political dynamic but lately things have
taken a deeper turn Democratic
candidates call for a total abolition a
number of states have or could be
banning the industry and Wall Street is
divesting on top of it all prison
populations are decreasing that's a huge
indictment despite all the noise in the
market companies have very good new
quiddity how a company is structured on
its balance sheet does not save it from
a cultural revolution I don't know if
it's a breaking point or a time of
change but I think it presents it again
an opportunity for us to be
[Music]
more transparent about what we do could
this be the beginning of the end for
private prisons at the height of the war
on drugs and tough on crime era the
country began in prison more people than
ever seven hundred and fifty thousand
people were incarcerated in America by
1997 1.7 million with the growing prison
population so were the costs of
operating prisons from 1980 to 1994
operating costs of state and federal
prisons went from 3 million dollars to
nearly 18 million dollars overcrowding
was becoming increasingly problematic
and the government couldn't keep up
Prabhat prisons were established to help
maintain the ten billion dollar industry
private prison companies could build
facilities faster without voter approval
they also claimed they could provide a
higher quality at a lower price but the
accuracy of that claim has been under
scrutiny no compelling government study
is conclusive one way or another in 1996
the General Accounting Office stated
that they were not able to conclude that
privatization saved money a Department
of Justice study from 2001 claimed that
the average savings from privatization
was only about 1% and not the projected
20% there are a lot of accounting
details that make it difficult to
properly compare the cost between public
and private and actually there are a lot
of factors that make it difficult to
compare quality the private prison model
was simple build and manage buildings
and secure government contracts charge a
daily fee for each bed you fill
something called per diem or what is
commonly referred to as Mandy's in 1987
Corrections Corporation of America sees
see a today called core Civic charged 32
dollars and 17 cents per inmate by 1997
it charged the government 33% more
however the companies cost only
increased by about 8 percent the
company's revenue grew 27 times Brian
Evans is the CFL of Geo so where do I
look at the camera or about two-thirds
of Geo group's revenue comes from
federal and state corrections and
attention contracts ice contracts make
up 1/5 our business changed over the
years in 2003 with the chairman and CEO
the founder of the company George Zoli
had a directive at that time to expand
the company into other service lines
diversify if you will and to own and
operate more of the facilities so that
process started in about 2003 we were
about 500 million in revenue today we're
about two and a half billion in revenue
some of the that growth has been through
acquisitions about half of it through
acquisitions and about half of it
through organic growth new contracts on
new facilities in November 2019 CNBC
visited a geo group prison in Florida
access to Prisons for journalists is
unusual but geo was able to grant us
access with state approval within a week
we advocated on your behalf to to be
here because we want you to be here and
we like for people to come here and see
what goes on hopefully to change their
minds
South Bay Correctional Facility is owned
by the state of Florida but has been
managed by geo since 2009 a contract
worth 356 million dollars for 11 years
it houses nearly two thousand inmates
that are incarcerated for a variety of
crimes ranging from low-level charges to
felonies geo is paid fifty one dollars
and 11
per inmate or mandate South Bay offers a
number of educational vocational and
substance abuse programs many of which
are mandated by the state in 2015 geo
launched its continuum of care program
it's an expansion of imprison of
programs and includes post release
support according to the contract the
state pays geo around 3 million dollars
for COC at Southbank it was all about
okay what's our role responsibility and
that was to provide the most
opportunities in making sure that we did
everything we could to provide the
rehabilitative services so after they
left they wouldn't come back
Shawn Killian was convicted of murder
when he was 21 years old he's 35 now
he's been at South base since 2011 when
you're in state-run facilities if you
have longer than a five-year sentence
basically it's very difficult to get in
programs you know they give priority to
the guys that are about to get out but
at the same time there's not a lot of
programs offered here they have so many
programs and everybody's encouraged to
take part in them between ice
US Marshals Bureau of Prisons and state
geo manages about 70 facilities we asked
David Ventrella how many of them look
like this how many of them look like
this well I would say all of the
facilities that we own either look like
this or better the ones that we manage I
would say are pretty similar
but the visit to South Bay is one side
of the private prison story less than a
month prior to the tour and a mate was
flown to a hospital after a stabbing geo
group like Cora Civic and other private
prison companies have been plagued with
litigation and claims of human rights
abuses there's only two ways for a
for-profit entity to create revenue one
is to increase your revenue basically by
increasing your market share and
secondly to cut costs so to lower your
expenses and therefore take home more
profitability and so if you're cutting
cost when it comes to caring for humans
that's generally not going to put you in
a good place do bad things happen in a
well-run system yes they do we don't try
to cover it up and we try to learn from
that
the George Hill Correctional Facility in
Delaware County Pennsylvania for example
was operated by GL from 2002 to 2008
twelve inmates died at the facility
during that time they resumed control of
the prison in 2017 when they acquired
community education centers for 360
million dollars this is a jail that has
significant significant issues we have
had instances of wrongful death suicides
that have resulted in very large
settlements with families we've had
issues with under maintenance that's
resulted in I wouldn't call dangerous
but certainly inhumane conditions
continuous understaffing issues
private prison companies occupy about
seven percent of the total state and
federal correctional facilities market
that still produces billions of dollars
in revenue for detention however about
seventy five percent of total detainees
are in crowded facilities the funding of
detention took off during President
Obama's second term coinciding with the
increase in migrants from Central
America the Senate bill as currently
written and has hidden the floor would
put in place the toughest border
enforcement plan that America has ever
seen still in August 2016 then Deputy
Attorney General Sally Yates announced
her plan to phase out private prisons
under the Bureau of Prisons she said
that private prison companies compared
poorly to public prisons largely based
on data from a damning oh I do report
that was published the same month I
think the Inspector General cherry
picked some areas where we didn't match
up as good with the Bo P in those
specific areas but overall we had less
grievances we had better rates for
inmate violence and assaults and things
like that
overall grievances were higher in Bo p
prisons however the DOJ selected eight
categories of grievances themed
particularly relevant to safety and
security in that analysis inmates in
private prisons about 24% more
grievances the stops plummeted the yates
announcement would only affect the
revenue streams coming from the federal
correctional system moody saw enough
risk and lowered their ratings we knew
that they from a liability and equity
perspective they were fine but from a
business perspective we didn't know sort
of what was what was going to happen
after this it was a lot of noise and
this was headline risk that we had
always incorporating our ratings but
this came to fruition it
and come to fruition two months later
Donald Trump was elected president and
within days of coming into office
Attorney General Jeff Sessions rescinded
the Yates memo stock prices soared
private prison companies were those that
one the most
the following day after the election the
first year the Trump administration
where things were like gangbusters for
the industry
Alan z-bo has studied the federal
detention and collections funding Trump
has obviously been harsher and his
treatment of immigrants but it's really
a continuation of a trend in family
detention started under Obama you look
at our record on over the last twenty
years both under Republican and
Democratic administrations talking at
the federal level you know there's been
steady growth of you know five to seven
percent and that's because of the
services that we provide and the quality
of the services campaign donations
depict the industry favoring Republicans
over Democrats core civic and geo group
each donated two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars to Trump's inaugural
committee GL group's contract revenue
from ice and US Marshals is up by forty
three percent from the last two years of
President Obama to the first two years
of the Trump administration Attorney
General Jeff Sessions announced the zero
tolerance policy in April 2018 it was
meant to ramp up the criminal
prosecution of people entering the
United States illegally but images of
separated families at the border and the
detention of migrants under questionable
conditions
[Music]
[Applause]
unleashed a firestorm is the immigration
policy under this particular
administration really disturbed people
the administration lit a fire so we're
keeping families together on June 20th
2018 president Trump signed an executive
order to halt the separation of families
[Music]
by then 3,000 children had already been
separated from their parents but it
continued and to this day the exact
number is unclear
we have no role in operating the border
facilities which is where you saw a lot
of pictures of neg overcrowded inhumane
conditions those aren't our facilities
they don't look anything like that we
also don't house unaccompanied minors
sparked by an outraged public the
families belong together coalition was
formed 250 organizations came together
to protest collect signatures and raise
awareness and money to help families for
unite but a few wanted more Jen
Armstrong co-authored a report that
looked at who was profiting off of the
detention of migrants and private
prisons were part of it something that
is really key is understanding about
private prisons is that they're actually
structured as something called real
estate investment trusts for reefs REI
tes the interesting thing about this
structure is that it actually allows two
companies to largely avoid paying income
taxes the flipside of that however is
that they are actually required to pass
on about 90% of their taxable income to
investors in the form of dividends and
so they don't actually get to keep much
cash on hand which requires them to
really wholly rely on a bunch of
short-term borrowing to for their
operations for any expansions that they
want to do that's where Wall Street came
in by mid-2016 geo had 1.9 billion
dollars in debt and core civic then CCA
1.5 billion dollars and six banks
largely financed it
we know that private prisons make money
when we're detaining more people during
this immigration crisis but what people
don't see are the large syndicate of
banks that are providing all the
financing for all the operations for
these companies who are then also
profiting through interests and fees and
various income that they get from their
financing relationship activists took
matters into their own hands the
coalition mass organized to urge the
banks to divest by March 2019 the group
got their first win when JP Morgan
announced they were no longer bank with
the industry seven banks have follow
suit it's actually eighty seven point
four percent of all of the known
financing for lines of credit and term
loans for these two companies in June
2019 Elizabeth Warren published a
statement that if elected she will shut
down the use of federal private
detention facilities many other
candidates have espoused similar
intentions Nevada and California signed
into law bans that would eventually
phase out private prisons Colorado in
Minnesota could soon the largest pension
fund in the country the California
Public Employees Retirement System is
divesting so have a number of city
pensions in a response the stocks of geo
and core civic have fallen by 30 percent
since June 2019 that's exactly what
happens when you mass organize and so
when you have every Democratic
presidential candidate saying if I win
private prisons are abolished that's not
just about the candidates themselves
it's now a party stance and in a
two-party system that business should be
very concerned we redid ours our credit
facility which is about 1.8 billion
dollar credit facility we renewed that
in June of this year and most of the
other banks participated in that process
and renewed with us through 2024 so some
of them since then have made public
statements that they don't intend to
renew in the future but I think we'll
just have to see how that plays out we
continue to dialogue with many of those
banks we dialogue with other
institutions but we'll be able to access
calendar
[Music]
Fitch downgraded kora Civic and changed
its outlook to negative they do not
reach your group Moody's has not changed
their ratings since 2016 there's a lot
of headline risk obviously and despite
all the noise in the market companies
have very good new quiddity for example
poor Civic as one bond coming due next
year but they have enough they have over
600 million in liquid e right now geo
they don't have anything due to 2023
either both of them are you know their
their renewal read their retention rates
so far both of them are in the high 90s
they both reported earnings growth and
what they call Noi growth which is net
operating income per the different
contracts they both have added it's
funny to say this way but they've all
all have added people to their beds or
they call it heads in the beds so from
our perspective we're very comfortable
where our ratings are right now hood on
Seagram is an assistant professor of
Finance at NYU and has studied geo group
and core civics balance sheets over a
five-year period the business is largely
dependent on who's funding and who's in
power rather than the fundamentals
itself therefore as long as this
administration is willing to fund them
they're going to be doing reasonably
well only issue with these companies
they don't have enough debt financing
for growth so if they don't have that
and if the major banks pull out of it
like Bank of America JP m and Wells
Fargo they can be in a steady state but
they cannot grow as much as they want
those concerns maybe slowly vanishing
after failing to raise a two hundred and
fifty million dollar term loan back in
June debt wire reported on December 13th
2019 that Cora Civic was working with a
Japanese investment bank to raise the
money
something activists have long feared
could be happened divestment is as much
about the financial conversation and the
fine
Angell impact as it is about shifting
culture shifting the narrative and
getting policy to reflect the values of
the people so regardless of how strong
core civics and geo groups financials
are the culture can still eliminate them
a lot can happen between now and with
the financing terms mature for core
civic and geo group while significantly
more expensive more foreign banks like
Nomura can step in and fill the gap an
election can swing things dramatically
and the companies could continue to
diversify their portfolios to protect
themselves all the while the American
public is more engaged than ever you can
say is at the beginning of the end and
as the end look like 2020 maybe not but
whether the end is 2020 or the end is
2024 it's inevitable it's coming the
toss of a coin pretty much
[Music]